# Origin of "endian"

The terms “little endian” and “big endian” come from the book *Gulliver’s Travels* by Jonathan Swift, where two warring factions could not agree as to how a soft-boiled egg should be opened—by the little end or by the big. Just like the egg issue, there is no technological reason to choose one byte ordering convention over
the other, and hence the arguments degenerate into bickering about sociopolitical issues. As long as one of the conventions is selected and adhered to consistently, the choice is arbitrary.

Here is how Jonathan Swift, writing in 1726, described the history of the controversy between big and little endians:

> ...Lilliput and Blefuscu... have, as I was going to tell you, been engaged in a most obstinate war for six-and-thirty moons past. It began upon the following occasion. It is allowed on all hands, that the primitive way of breaking eggs, before we eat them, was upon the larger end; but his present majesty’s grandfather, while he was a boy, going to eat an egg, and breaking it according to the ancient practice, happened to cut one of his fingers. Whereupon the emperor his father published an edict, commanding all his subjects, upon great penalties, to break the smaller end of their eggs. The people so highly resented this law, that our histories tell us, there have been six rebellions raised on that account; wherein one emperor lost his life, and another his crown. These civil commotions were constantly fomented by the monarchs of Blefuscu; and when they were quelled, the exiles always fled for refuge to that empire. It is computed that eleven thousand persons have at several times suffered death, rather than submit to break their eggs at the smaller end. Many hundred large volumes have been published upon this controversy: but the books of the Big-endians have been long forbidden, and the whole party rendered incapable by law of holding employments. (Jonathan Swift. Gulliver’s Travels, Benjamin Motte, 1726.) 

In his day, Swift was satirizing the continued conflicts between England (Lilliput) and France (Blefuscu). Danny Cohen, an early pioneer in networking protocols, first applied these terms to refer to byte ordering, and the terminology has been widely adopted.
